Someone get Lana Del Rey to the hospital, she's overdosed on benadryl

I can honestly hardly sit down and write a review for this album right now in the dark because that requires deeply pondering the nature and purpose of it.

This fills me with a visceral terror.

The hairs on my neck are standing up writing this, I'm taking off my headphones to see if that noise was real or in my head, looking over my shoulder to see if anything is in the shadows. Something about the terror of this album hangs in between the real and the imaginary.

You're standing on the porch of a small house deep in the woods and you can see a what looks like something moving in the distance. It's dark out, and the woods are darker. But something keeps catching your eye. Is it an animal? A person? Maybe just part of a tree...but there's eyes out there and they're looking at me. They're definitely looking at me and they know that I'm afraid. I need someone to help me...but if this thing is what I imagine it to be no one can save me.

This...is <em>fear</em>. Not being surprised, not being spooked, not being startled. This is the fear that existed long before us and will exist long after we're gone.

So there's that...

Some other songs on the album aren't as overtly dark as the opener, although some are close. The 2nd and 4th track are softer ballads that explore a more human and sensitive part of Ethel's story, while maintaining the aesthetic of a mind filled with static abd haze, haunted by something or someone from the past. It sort of reminds me of the sound of some Caretaker records if you've ever heard those.

Then there's songs like Houseofpsychoticwomn that elicit a similar feeling of feer as the opener. The repeated "I love you" layered over hellish sounds makes you think that at some point in her life, Ethel was probably told this by someone who was truly a monster in her life.

It's the layer of aggressive darkness and gentle(?) darkness that makes this whole thing feel like having your head repeatedly plunged underwater. Even when you come up for air it's not a good feeling and you know you're probably going back under.

Pulldrone is probably the most lore-heavy song on the album, I see it as a chronological explanation for the state of the main character of this album. 

Ethel lists off 12 steps from apathy to desolation. The verbage and overall tone goes from sour to grim. Lines filled with self-annihilatory talk, the world begins to warp around her. When she finishes reading step 6, there's a small bell sound and a pause. You can tell that she does not want to continue because this is the moment in her story where she became utterly lost from who she once was. But she proceeds: 

"Perversion" 

The way her voice sinks and breaks makes my body feel like I'm hidden beneath a frozen lake.

After she finished reading all 12 lines, you have to sit with her as the last half of the song drones on. And it's an uncomfortable feeling because it seems like she's still in the room with you. She looks at me and her eyes are filled with black ink. I can turn my head but I still feel her gaze rotting my skin.

The next song "Etienne" feels like another dark song, but then at the end we hear the testament of someone describing a person who was near their end and they found a way out. And so the tone of the rest of the album is set, recovery.

And the last song is probably the most likely proof of this is the final song "Amber Waves". <em>This</em> is the breath of fresh air that we've been so desperately waiting for.

The very last line is "I can't feel anything". Is she really better, or is she just numb. I will definitely see this album again tonight in my dreams.
