Swans is definitely a group that makes special music. Nobody quite matches their ability to construct fully fleshed out sci-fi worlds without even explicitly stating anything. The imagery their music evokes is simply that potent. In my opinion, this is their greatest showcase of this feat. The level of detail in which I experience the world from which this album was born is astounding. That being said, as I discuss the album I'll be referencing the story as I see it told through the music.

From the first note in Screen shot you can already sense something sinister in the air. With each loop the track grows, almost in a way that is meant to subvert the listener, sneaking in new disorienting sounds one after another. 
This track sees the Sun rise over a wasted landscape. The world is barren, but not devoid of life, rather devoid of any sense of morals, good-will, or civility.
Something Swans has made a trademark of theirs is the ability to slowly build a song until it has enough momentum to obliterate anything in its path. This track is a perfect example of this for the uninitiated.
The track continues to pile on to the central rhythm until it reaches critical mass and unfurls into a ball of white hot noise. The heat from the Sun becomes unignorable as it reaches a high point in the sky and all of the world and its sin, decay, and unforgivingness are available for all to see.

The second track begins with a slow, disorienting, arcing sound. Something like watching waves of heat rise off desert grounds in the distance. And it's in that desert we see a lone traveler dragging their dead and rotten body through the sand, clinging to the last semblance of life.
The bass line is steady and hypnotic. They exist in a daze watching the vultures circle the infernal Sun. Their disorientation eventually turns to manic delusions. 

"I'm just a little boy". "I need love".

Laugher echoes in their head. They cry out in response.

"I'm not a human!"

Their humanity has been stripped from them by this unforgiving world. The gods of this world continue to torment his mind rather than claiming him, forcing him to prolong his tortuous voyage across the sands.

As I mention "gods" I feel the next track "A Little God In My Hands" serves as a deeper look into the theistic nature of this work. The people of this world worship many different gods, all have a brutal and unforgiving disposition.
This song observes a sacrificial ritual of the people. They too are brutal, much like the world they live in. Their settlements lay in rotten filth, and reek of rot.
Much like the traveler in the sands, their minds have unraveled noticeably. The base levels of sanity are unrecognizable from the distant viewpoint of civility.
Their minds are decayed to the core as represented by the piercing static present in the many climaxes of this track.

Up to now, the album's tracks have served mostly as exposition, displaying the world in vivid, feverish detail.
"Bring the Sun", however, is the first song that explores the plot of this album on a deeper level. The song begins quietly. In space above this world we can see a distant shimmering light. In an instant we zoom in and are face to face with the roaring inferno of a comet. Something about the comet feels alive, it appears to move with knowledge of its purpose, of its destination.
The repeating guitar riff roars with the heat of the blaze. The light is blinding, and only increasing in intensity. Unknown to the world below, this conveyor of death is hurtling towards them with a purpose.
As the riff fades, our perspective shifts back to the planet as we see cultish figures in robes casting their hands to the sky. Surrounded by alien glyphs sprawled in black ink, they are focused intently on a sole speaker chanting indecipherable vocations into the air, thick with smoke and the stench of blood.
The speaker continues to chant, the dedicated focus of the cult members unbroken. The cadence of the chanting begins to rise, eventually calling upon the other members to join in.
The strength of their ritual reaches new heights. They all speak in unison:

"Sunnnnnnnnnnn"

"Bring the Sun!" the leader calls in response. Some of the glyphs on the ground begin to glow a deep red and the leading speaker is seen slightly levitating from where he stands.
The room begins to shake, lightly and then violently as the group continues. Until the whole act reaches a climax and the room plunges into darkness and the members involuntarily drop to the floor and lay as anonymous bodies in an empty room.
Panning out we can see that the light that once scorched the Earth has vanished from the sky, and this world in darkness will plunge into a new layer of hell. The rest of the song “Toussaint L’Ouverture” serves as an illustration of this new dark and disorienting world. Sounds of horses, saws, whistles, violent and thrashing heaps of sound. Michael Gira’s voice occasionally barks out from an obscuring haze. Right around 31:45 it seems the song is over and we are fully aware of the evil that now resides in this world, but what immediately follows reminds us just how little we could possibly know.

“Some Things We Do” is often overlooked as an interlude, but I think it does an incredible job of maintaining tension while providing a brief respite from the constant aggression this album has reached over the last couple tracks. It’s much softer, but still has that disorienting, wavering sound. Paired with cryptic vocals the atmosphere serves as a perfect transition to the back half of the album.

I don’t really have as much to say about some of the songs on the back half, they just continue this narrative of a rotten world stepping even further into decay. Religious zealots calling for destruction, savagery running rampant etc. etc. “She Loves Us” does exactly this, and then “Oxygen” turns the dial up to 11.


I would say “Kirsten Supine” -> “Nathalie Neal” -> “To Be Kind” represents the final stages of the narrative started in “Bring the Sun”. The way the tension only rises in these final tracks while feeling like a totally organic narrative is genuinely mind-bending. “Kirsten Supine” is the beginning of the end. The start of the apocalypse. The last half of the sing brings our awareness to a cosmic horror beyond comprehension. We are slowly raised to become aware of an entity that exists beyond our realm of consciousness. The most pure and divine form of evil sits in front of us. There is a vastness before you, like an all consuming black void pulling you in. The entity is aware that you can see it, and for just a moment you can see it…and then you wake up with your mind unraveled like the frayed end of a rope.

“Nathalie Neal” sees the cultish group from before atop a large mound. Dozens of them, these hooded figures kneel round a large circle, with arms outstretched; it can be seen they have been etched with the tip of a blade to form cryptic patterns from shoulder to to fingertips. The preparation for the end has begun, and they are giving their appreciation to the comet hurtling towards the earth. The privilege to bask in it’s light is well observed.

“To Be Kind” is the ultimate, world-ending climax that everything has been leading up to. In silent defeat, all eyes are pointed to the sky, waiting for the end. There is a long silence, followed by earth-shattering roar, followed once more, by silence.

I hope one day I come across another piece of art that totally transports me the way that To Be Kind does. It’s likely the lengthiest review I’ll write simply because of how much imagery it evokes. Today, I don’t really listen to it much as it’s basically a movie I’ve watched a dozen times and have now memorized the lines, but I will always appreciate just how much I’ve gotten out of it.

Unequivocally a 10.



